On this CD, there is a complete collection of all pictures taken during the entire year of 2002-2003. On the left there is a list of links some of which include links to the PHS Band Website. Everything else is contained on this CD. Please take a moment to look through the list of links. You will see they are conveniently organized into categories, which brings me to the next topic.

Support: Where can I use this CD?
This CD can be used anywhere on any computer with an accessible CD-ROM drive. The WINDOWS browser can only be used on computers with Windows 98 or higher. The links are better used on Windows 2000 or higher because of Windows’ ability to open folders in a browser like this one.  If this is not available to you, don't worry; simply click the 'Switch to thumbnail mode' where all the links are set to pre-made pages using thumbnails.

Support: I don’t like this browser!
If you find this browser is hard to use, don’t sweat it. Follow these simple instructions to make a shortcut to the pictures folder. 
Locate the CD-Rom drive icon by double clicking on the ‘My Computer’ on your desktop. 
When the window opens right click on the PHS icon, or the CD icon (usually title ‘e’, ‘g’, or ‘h’).
When the list opens, click ‘Open’; NOT ‘Auto play’.
This should take you a folder that contains to directories labeled ‘Browser’ and ‘Pictures’.
The browser is located in the folder titled ‘Browser’ and the pictures are in the folder titled ‘Pictures’.
Right click on the pictures folder and click ‘Copy’.
Now make sure your desktop is visible and right click, select the option ‘Paste Shortcut’; NOT ‘Paste’!
Now there is a shortcut on your desktop to the pictures, REMEMBER THE CD HAS TO BE IN THE DRIVE TO USE THIS SHORTCUT!

Support: How do I find my way through the folders?
The folders are simple. They are set up exactly like the links in the browser. The first category is divided into ‘Marching Band’, and ‘Concert Band’. From there, all the categories are based on events. Find the event you want, and there may be a more specific folder. Dates are also put on the folder names for your own convenience. This detail leaves the option of searching by a date. Brief descriptions are also in the name of the file or in the comments on the picture.

Bonus Material:
Also included on this CD is some bonus material such as the song listings.  The blue or red highlighted songs can be found on this CD in the 'Music' folder.  These are all songs that the band has played during the year.  I hope you enjoy the collection!
The Presentation played at the Band Banquet 2002-2003 is also included on this CD.  It can be found in the 'Browser' folder under 'PHS Band Presentation'.  Each slide is in 'wmf' format.  If you have any trouble with the files please feel free to contact us through the hyperlinks on THIS page.

