Blamestorming: Sitting around in a group, discussing why a deadline was missed or a project failed, and who was responsible.
Seagull Manager - A manager who flies in, makes a lot of noise, poops over everything and then leaves.
Cube Farm: An office filled with cubicles.
Idea Hamsters: People who always seem to have their idea generators running.
Mouse Potato: The on-line, wired generation's answer to the couch potato.
Prairie Dogging: When someone yells or drops something loudly in a cube farm, and people's heads pop up over the walls to see what's going on.
Poets: Students accepted into top-school MBA programs who have less than stellar quantitative skills.
SITCOMs: What yuppies turn into when they have children and one of them stops working to stay home with the kids. Stands for Single Income, Two Children, Oppressive Mortgage.
Stress Puppy: A person who seems to thrive on being stressed out and whiny.
Swiped Out: An ATM or credit card that has been rendered useless because the magnetic strip is worn away from extensive use.
Tourists: People who take training classes just to get a vacation from their jobs. 'We had three serious students in the class; the rest were just tourists.'
Treeware: Hacker slang for documentation or other printed material.
Xerox Subsidy: Euphemism for swiping free photocopies from one's workplace.
Alpha Geek: The most knowledgeable, technically proficient person in an office or work group.
Assmosis: The process by which some people seem to absorb success and advancement by kissing up to the boss rather than working hard.
Flight Risk: Used to describe employees who are suspected of planning to leave a company or department soon.
GOOD Job: A 'Get-Out-Of-Debt' job. A well-paying job people take in orderto pay off their debts, one that they will quit as soon as they are solvent again.
Irritainment: Entertainment and media spectacles that are annoying, but you find yourself unable to stop watching them. The O.J. trials were a prime example.
Percussive Maintenance: The fine art of whacking the crap out of an electronic device to get it to work again.
Uninstalled: Euphemism for being fired. Heard on the voicemail of a vice president at a downsizing computer firm: 'You have reached the number of an uninstalled vice president. Please dial our main number and ask the operator for assistance.
