The Ultimate Warm Up
Table Of Contents


Part 1. Getting Your Air Moving


Part 2. Lip Buzzing


Part 3. Mouthpiece WorkA. Mid-range to pedal tones buzzing
B. Slow slides from medium to low to medium high

Part 4. Long TonesA. Mid-range to lowest possible notes
B. Mid-range to medium high notes

Part 5. TonguingA. Mid-range to lowest possible notes
B. Mid-range to highest possible notes

Part 6. FlexibilityA. Mid-range to low lip slurs
B. Low to medium high lip slurs extended

Download Chapter 7 for FREE!

Part 7. Scales (All Keys)A. Major Scale (Two octave)
B. Minor Scale (Two octave)
C. Harmonic Minor (Two octave)
D. Melodic Minor (Two octave)
E. Brief Major exercise and one octave review

Part 8. Range Study

Part 9. Flow Studies

Part 10. Addendum
A. ALL articles from TrumpetStudio.com
B. Fingering Chart

The Ultimate Warm Up
How To Use This Warm Up Book

The entire book should be played at each practice session. If time does not permit playing the entire book, then play as much of each section as time permits. Do not skip any sections. You must do the exercises in order from beginning to end. (If the Ultimate Warm Up contains exercises to high for you, skip that section until your able and go to the next exercise.)

Part 1. Getting Your Air Moving
Set your metronome to 60 bpm for these warm-ups. Air is the secret to great tonguing, range and tone production. It is THE most important aspect of playing any wind instrument. Think of your air as a continual stream of water flowing through your kitchen faucet. Always constant never stopping!
Air Tips!
-Low notes require a greater volume of air to produce a great tone. Imagine making an ‘ah’ sound in your mouth and directing the air into a large tube. Always constant never stopping.
-High notes require fast air. Imagine saying an ‘e’ sound in your mouth and directing the air super fast into a small straw! Always constant never stopping.

Part 2. Lip Buzzing
Set your metronome to 60 bpm for these warm-ups. For these exercises try to get a nice full, rich sound that is full of tone. What is done here is amplified by the mouthpiece and horn. Do not spend more than 5 minutes on this section. Go for the most beautiful sound that you can create. Listen to yourself, tape record your playing. Is your sound full, rich, warm, musical, and pleasing?

Part 3. Mouthpiece Work
Set your metronome to 60 bpm for these warm-ups. Hold the mouthpiece with the thumb and forefinger at the end of the mouthpiece. This is to keep you from putting pressure on your embouchure. The key is to keep the air constantly flowing. Go for a great sound! Listen to yourself, tape record your playing. Go for a warm, rich sound with a lot of tone. What you produce now is simply amplified by your instrument. If your sound is thin, this is the place to devote more work and energy. Play the exercises in a relaxed fashion, not loud or soft, but with a nice full tone slowly moving higher and lower as directed.

Part 4. Long Tones
Set your metronome to 60 bpm for these warm-ups. Again, the key is to keep the air constant, always flowing. Go for the most beautiful sound that you can create. Listen to yourself, tape record your playing. Is your sound full, rich, warm, musical, and pleasing? You can make beautiful music by simply playing long tones, it is possible!

Part 5. Tonguing
Set your metronome to 80 bpm for these warm-ups. The key is to keep the air constantly flowing. Think of the kitchen faucet analogy again, while the faucet is constantly flowing, imagine flicking a butter knife quickly through the stream of water. The butter knife quickly separates the water and the stream of water continues never stopping. The air flows on, but is lightly separated by the tongue. When playing these warm-ups use different syllables for tonguing. Use as directed: da, dee, do, ta, tee, to. Go for the most beautiful sound that you can create. Listen to your sound, tape record your playing. Is your sound full, rich, warm, musical, and pleasing?

Part 6. Flexibility
Set your metronome between 60 and 80 bpm for these warm-ups. Another key to playing the trumpet is flexibility. The ability to move from 2nd valve F# to 2nd valve B quickly and smoothly is essential. Along with other valve combinations, these simply have to be mastered. The key for successful lip slurs is to keep the air constantly flowing. When doing the extended slurs change the air flow! The low notes require a greater volume of air to produce a great tone. Imagine making an ‘ah’ sound in your mouth and directing the air into a large tube. Always constant never stopping. The high notes require fast air. Imagine saying an ‘e’ sound in your mouth and directing the air super fast into a small straw! Always constant never stopping. Go for the most beautiful sound that you can create. Listen to yourself, tape record your playing. Is your sound full, rich, warm, musical, and pleasing?

Part 7. Scales (All Keys) Download Chapter 7 for FREE!
Set your metronome between 60 and 80 bpm for these scales. The key to this chapter is to be Very Fluid. Keep the air constantly flowing as you pass between the different octaves. The air flows on, but is lightly separated by the tongue. Try sluring each scale, and experiment with different tounguing syllables from the chapter on tonguing. Go for the most beautiful sound that you can create. Listen to your sound, tape record your playing. Is your sound full, rich, warm, musical, and pleasing?

Part 8. Range Study
Set your metronome between 60 and 80 bpm for these warm-ups. I believe that the type of air needed to play lead is most closely related to a High Pressure Air Tank. You must tank up on the air and release the valve, releasing the Super Fast Air Stream. When playing lead one should ride this high pressure air stream and not force the lips. Let the High Pressure Air Tank and the subsequent Super Fast Air Stream do the work, NOT THE LIPS! Go for the most beautiful sound that you can create. Listen to yourself, tape record your playing. Is your sound full, rich, warm, musical, and pleasing?

Part 9. Flow Studies
Set your metronome between 60 and 80 bpm for these warm-ups. These studies are meant to make your playing as musical as possible. Sing the music, yes sing it! Imagine the most beautiful voice singing the passage in your mind. Now go to the music and reproduce exactly what you hear in your mind. Exactly! Think of each line as a separate musical idea. The goal is to think across the bar line to the end of the musical phrase. This is why musicians play and practice! Why play the trumpet if you are not receiving a musical experience? Music is full of feelings and emotions, play all your music this way and you’ll never want to stop. Go for the most beautiful sound that you can create. Listen to yourself, tape record your playing. Is your sound full, rich, warm, musical, and pleasing?



Part 10. Addendum
Complete article reproduction from TrumpetStudio.com Topics include: Skill Building - How To Play High Consistently - Mouthpiece Selection is Critical for Success - Double Tonguing and Single Tonguing - Lip Buzzing - Practicing For A Performance - Finding Time To Practice - Equipment - Synthetic Oil: Use With Caution - Braces - Endurance - Popular Method Books - Recommended Discography - Fingering Chart.

